                                           Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
                                                                           Models


                                                            Zixiang Chen * 1 Yihe Deng * 1 Huizhuo Yuan * 1 Kaixuan Ji 1 Quanquan Gu 1


                                                                  Abstract                                      1    Introduction
                                               Harnessing the power of human-annotated data

arXiv:2401.01335v3 \[cs.LG\] 14 Jun 2024 through Supervised Fine-Tuning
(SFT) is pivotal Large Language Models (LLMs) have began a ground- for
advancing Large Language Models (LLMs). breaking era in artificial
general intelligence (AGI), demon- In this paper, we delve into the
prospect of grow- strating extraordinary capabilities across a wide
range of ing a strong LLM out of a weak one without the domains that
require intricate reasoning and specialized need for acquiring
additional human-annotated knowledge. These models excel in areas such
as math- data. We propose a new fine-tuning method ematical
reasoning/problem solving (Cobbe et al., 2021; called Self-Play
fIne-tuNing (SPIN), which starts Wei et al., 2022; Lewkowycz et al.,
2022), code genera- from a supervised fine-tuned model. At the heart
tion/programming (Chen et al., 2021; Austin et al., 2021; Li of SPIN
lies a self-play mechanism, where the et al., 2022), text generation
(Bubeck et al., 2023; Anil et al., LLM refines its capability by playing
against in- 2023; Touvron et al., 2023), summarization and creative
stances of itself. More specifically, the LLM writing, among others. A
significant advancement in LLMs generates its own training data from its
previ- is the post-pre-training alignment with the more desirable ous
iterations, refining its policy by discerning behaviors (Mishra et al.,
2021; Victor et al., 2022; Chung these self-generated responses from
those ob- et al., 2022; Thoppilan et al., 2022), a process often reliant
tained from human-annotated data. Our method on the costly
human-annotated data. Typical alignment progressively elevates the LLM
from a nascent methods include Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) (Ouyang
model to a formidable one, unlocking the full po- et al., 2022; Tunstall
et al., 2023a) based on human demon- tential of human-annotated
demonstration data strations, and Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feed- for SFT. Theoretically, we prove that the global back (RLHF)
(Christiano et al., 2017; Ziegler et al., 2019; optimum to the training
objective function of our Stiennon et al., 2020; Bai et al., 2022a)
based on human method is achieved only when the LLM policy preferences.
aligns with the target data distribution. Empiri- All the aforementioned
alignment methods require a sub- cally, we evaluate our method on
several bench- stantial volume of human annotated data. Therefore, there
mark datasets including the HuggingFace Open is increasing interest in
developing fine-tuning methods that LLM Leaderboard, MT-Bench, and
datasets from can effectively utilize human data, thereby streamlining
the Big-Bench. Our results show that SPIN can sig- alignment process.
This motivates us to study fine-tuning nificantly improve the LLM’s
performance across LLMs without the need for additional human-annotated
data a variety of benchmarks and even outperform beyond the fine-tuning
dataset. Our study is also related to models trained through direct
preference opti- the broader goal of converting weak models to strong
mod- mization (DPO) supplemented with extra GPT-4 els without the
requirement for extra training data, which preference data. This sheds
light on the promise is of central interest in machine learning that can
be traced of self-play, enabling the achievement of human- back to the
boosting algorithms (Kearns & Valiant, 1994; level performance in LLMs
without the need Schapire, 1990; Freund, 1995; Freund & Schapire, 1997).
for expert opponents. Codes are available at The self-training algorithm
(Vapnik, 1999; Grandvalet & https://github.com/uclaml/SPIN. Bengio,
2004; Lee, 2013) has also been proved to be able to \* Equal
contribution 1 Department of Computer Science, Univer- convert weak
learners to strong learners in mixture models sity of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Correspondence without the need for additional
labeled data (Frei et al., 2022; to: Quanquan Gu <qgu@cs.ucla.edu>. Kou
et al., 2022). However, the pursuit of autonomously Proceedings of the
41 st International Conference on Machine enhancing a weak LLM without
external guidance is both Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024.
Copyright 2024 by intriguing and understudied. This raises the following
ques- the author(s). tion:

                                                                                                            1

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Can we empower a weak LLM to improve itself without dataset
Ultrachat200k (Ding et al., 2023) reaches a perfor- acquiring additional
human annotated data? mance plateau or even diminished evaluation
scores, our method consistently improves zephyr-7b-sft-full In this
paper, we answer this question affirmatively. Inspired across successive
iterations while leveraging only a 50k sub- by the success of self-play
mechanisms (Samuel, 2000) in set of Ultrachat200k dataset. Ultimately,
SPIN effectively games, exemplified by AlphaGo Zero (Silver et al.,
2017b), improves the base model’s average score from 58.14 to AlphaZero
(Silver et al., 2017a), with historical roots traced 63.16 on the
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard (Beech- back to TD-Gammon (Tesauro et
al., 1995), we propose to ing et al., 2023) with remarkable 10%+
improvement in convert a weak LLM to a strong one through the lens of
scores on GSM8k and TruthfulQA, and from 5.94 to 6.78 self-play, where
the model is enhanced by playing against on MT-Bench (Zheng et al.,
2023). Notably, SPIN achieves itself without requiring any direct
supervision. In particu- results that are even comparable to models
trained on ad- lar, we propose a novel fine-tuning method called
Self-Play ditional 62k preference dataset (Tunstall et al., 2023a) on
fIne-tuNing (SPIN), which begins from a supervised fine- Open LLM
leaderboard and MT-Bench. tuned model. SPIN allows the LLM to engage in
self-play, eliminating the need for an expert annotator such as a hu-
Concurrent to our work, Singh et al. (2023) proposed the man or more
advanced LLMs like GPT-4. In detail, with use of synthetic data with
binary feedback in self-training, the LLM from previous iteration t
denoted by pθt , we em- reducing the reliance on human data. In
contrast, our ap- ploy it to generate responses y′ to the prompts x in
the proach eliminates the need for additional binary feedback
human-annotated SFT dataset. The subsequent objective from humans or an
extra reward model thanks to the self- is to find a new LLM pθt+1 ,
capable of distinguishing the play mechanism. Additionally, Burns et
al. (2023) employed responses y′ generated by pθt from the responses y
gener- a weak LLM model as the guidance to train stronger LLMs ated by
humans. This process can be seen as a two-player in a fashion of
weak-to-strong generation. Unlike Burns game: the main player, or the
new LLM pθt+1 , seeks to dis- et al. (2023), which necessitates both a
weak supervisor and cern between the responses of the opponent player
pθt and a strong model, our SPIN operates effectively with a single
human-generated responses, while the opponent, or the old LLM. LLM pθt ,
generates responses as similar as possible to those Notation. We use
lowercase letters and lowercase bold- in the human-annotated SFT
dataset. The new LLM pθt+1 is face letters to denote scalars and
vectors, respectively. We obtained by fine-tuning the old one pθt to
prefer responses use \[N \] to denote the index set {1, . . . , N }. In
the func- from pdata over pθt , resulting in a distribution pθt+1 that
tion space, let F be the function class. The symbol qdata is more
aligned with pdata . In the next iteration, the newly designates the
target data distribution, while p represents obtained LLM pθt+1 becomes
the opponent for response the conditional probability of LLM’s response
(i.e., LLM generation, with the self-play process aiming for the LLM
policy). to eventually converge to pθ∗ = pdata , so that the strongest
possible LLM can no longer differentiate the responses gen- erated by
its previous version and those generated by the 2 Related Work human.
Self-Play. Self-play (Samuel, 1959; Tesauro et al., 1995),
Interestingly, our method exhibits similarity with the re- where the
algorithm learns by playing against itself, has cently introduced direct
preference optimization (DPO) gained notable attention due to its
effectiveness in multi- method (Rafailov et al., 2023), with the notable
distinc- agent reinforcement learning (MARL). This method in- tion being
the self-play nature of our method. Conse- volves agents engaging in
interactions with copies of them- quently, our approach stands out by
eliminating the need selves, enabling an increasing level of challenge
and com- for extra human preference data, a requirement present in
plexity within the learning environment. A fundamental the DPO method.
Additionally, the self-play mechanism work in the field of self-play is
AlphaGo Zero (Silver in our method resembles the idea of generative
adversar- et al., 2017b), which demonstrated exceptional performance ial
networks (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Arjovsky against human players
using a self-play learning scheme. et al., 2017), albeit that both the
discriminator (main player) Subsequent research has expanded upon the
concept of and the generator (the opponent) in our method are in-
self-play, exploring various adaptations and implementa- stances of the
same LLM from different iterations. The- tions (Anthony et al., 2017;
Lanctot et al., 2017; Bansal oretically, we prove that our method
converges when the et al., 2018; Hernandez-Leal et al., 2018; Muller et
al., 2019; distribution of the LLM is identical to the target data dis-
Vinyals et al., 2019). Our method takes the self-play ap- tribution,
i.e., pθt = pdata . Our experimental results on proach akin to AlphaGo
Zero, which can convert a weak zephyr-7b-sft-full (Tunstall et al.,
2023a), a fine- model to a strong one without additional human-annotated
tuned LLM based on Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023), show data. While the
effectiveness of self-play in MARL is well- that while continued
training using SFT on its own SFT established, to our knowledge, our
work is the first to apply

                                                                  2

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

this approach to the enhancement of LLMs. to the large-scale
pre-training data (Ouyang et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023). In this
context, we consider a specific Synthetic Data for LLMs. In the context
of supervised task where the prompts, denoted by x, are derived from
fine-tuning (SFT) of LLMs, human-crafted data has proven a specified
distribution q(·). The notation pdata (·\|x) then to be a remarkably
effective source that enhances the perfor- represents the probability
distribution of the associated high- mance of LLMs on tasks such as code
generation (Roziere quality responses y from the training data.
Consequently, et al., 2023; Yang et al., 2023) and mathematical reason-
SFT involves training the LLM to minimize the following ing (Yuan et
al., 2023; Luo et al., 2023). While human data negative log-likelihood
loss associated with these distribu- typically exhibits high quality,
acquiring sufficient amount tions, of such data poses a challenge in
cost. In light of this con- h i sideration, the use of synthetic data
has become increasingly LSFT (θ) = −Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·\|x) log pθ y\|x .
(3.1) popular and considered as a proxy for human data. This ap- proach
primarily leverages advanced LLMs such as the GPT It should be noted
that excluding x ∼ q(·) from the expecta- series (Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, tion term yields the typical cross-entropy
loss, expressed as 2023) as the guidance to generate high-quality data
(Josi- −Ey∼pdata (·\|x) \[log pθ (y\|x)\]. LSFT (θ) attains its minimum
foski et al., 2023; Taori et al., 2023; Chiang et al., 2023; when the
model’s predictive distribution pθ (y\|x) aligns Li et al., 2023).
Recent research has also highlighted the perfectly with the distribution
of the labeled high-quality rephrasing capability of LLMs in prompting
for better LLM responses pdata (y\|x). response (Deng et al., 2023;
Prasad et al., 2023) as well as augmenting synthetic data for more
effective SFT (Yu Consequently, the LLM after SFT is anticipated to
generate et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023). In contrast to prior studies
responses that closely resemble those from pdata (y\|x). This that
utilized more advanced models for synthetic data gener- procedure is
therefore expected to significantly enhance the ation when pre-training
or fine-tuning a target model, our model’s performance in generating
appropriate responses approach directly generates synthetic data from
the target for a specific task. model itself. 3.2 RL Fine-Tuning 3
Problem Setting and Preliminaries RL fine-tuning (Christiano et al.,
2017; Bai et al., 2022a; We consider a Large Language Model (LLM)
parameter- Gao et al., 2023a) offers another method for enhancing the
ized by θ and denoted by pθ . The model takes as in- specific
capabilities of general-purpose pre-trained models. put a sequence x =
\[x1 , . . . , xn \], commonly referred to Typically, RL fine-tuning is
employed subsequent to SFT as the prompt, to generate the corresponding
response to achieve improved alignment for LLMs (Tunstall et al., y =
\[y1 , . . . , ym \]. The response y is therefore considered 2023a). as
a sample from the conditional probability distribution For a given
sequence pair (x, y), RL fine-tuning necessitates pθ (·\|x). In LLMs, xi
and yj represent individual tokens a deterministic reward function r(x,
y). The higher the from a predetermined vocabulary within the sequences
x reward r(x, y), the better the response y is to the given and y,
respectively. The auto-regressive model pθ generates prompt x. The
objective of the RL fine-tuning process is tokens sequentially for a
given position, leveraging only the then to maximize the following
objective function: sequence of previously generated tokens. This model
there- fore constitutes a Markov process, where the conditional LRL (θ)
= Ex∼q(·),y∼pθ (·\|x) \[r(x, y)\] probability distribution pθ (y\|x) can
be expressed through a  − λEx∼q(·) KL pθ (·\|x)\|\|pref (·\|x) ,
decomposition as follows: where the Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization
enforces m Y the new model pθ to be close to the reference model pref ,
pθ (y\|x) = pθ (yj \|x, y\<j ), and λ \> 0 is the regularization
parameter to control the j=1 deviation of the new model pθ from the
reference model where y\<1 is null and y\<j = \[y1 , . . . , yj−1 \] for
j = pref . In practice, the reference model pref is often initialized 2,
. . . , m. In the following, we review two major fine-tuning as the
supervised fine-tuned model. The inclusion of KL methods for LLMs:
supervised fine-tuning and reinforce- regularization is vital for
preventing excessive deviation ment learning (RL) fine-tuning. from the
reference model, which in turn reduces the risk of mode collapse. 3.1
Supervised Fine-Tuning Meanwhile, the primary challenge in RL
fine-tuning lies Supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is employed to tailor a
pre- in finding a good reward function. Typically, this function trained
LLM to specific downstream tasks, leveraging rel- requires training on a
preference dataset. The compila- atively smaller dataset of labeled
examples in comparison tion of such a dataset demands significant
resources, often

                                                                  3

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

involving comprehensive evaluations either by human an- pdata and the
opponent player’s distribution pθt : notators, i.e., reinforcement
learning from human feedback ft+1 = argmax E f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) ,  
(RLHF) (Christiano et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2022a) or strong (4.1) f
∈Ft AI agents, i.e., reinforcement learning from AI feedback (RLAIF)
(Bai et al., 2022b). where the expectation is computed over the
distributions x ∼ q(·), y ∼ pdata (·\|x), y′ ∼ pθt (·\|x), and Ft is a
se- 4 Method quence of highly expressive function classes that we will
determine in later deduction. The subscript t in Ft is due In this
section, we introduce a new fine-tuning method for to that the function
class is dependent on pθt . Given such a enhancing the performance of
LLMs without relying on ft+1 and a response sequence y to the prompt x,
the value additional human or AI feedback. Consider a high-quality of
ft+1 (x, y) reflects the main player’s degree of belief that supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) dataset SSFT = {(x, y)}ni=1 , y originates from pdata
rather than pθt . Ideally, the main which are sampled from the marginal
distribution q(x) and player ft+1 should yield a high value when y ∼
pdata (·\|x) pdata (y\|x). Given a supervised fine-tuned LLM pθ0 ,
further and a low value when y′ ∼ pθt (·\|x), where pθt is the op-
application of the SFT approach in (3.1) with SSFT will be ponent’s
distribution. Instead of solving (4.1), we can also ineffective and
potentially lead to worse performance. In solve the following more
general optimization problem, addition, without human and/or AI
feedback, it becomes ft+1 = argmin E ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) ,  
infeasible to acquire a preference dataset for RL fine-tuning (4.2)
(e.g., RLHF and RLAIF). This hinders the application of f ∈Ft RL
fine-tuning techniques. where the expectation is computed over the
distribution We evaluate pθ0 against SSFT , where pθ0 is the LLM x ∼
q(·), y ∼ pdata (·\|x), y ′ ∼ pθt (·\|x), and ℓ(·) is a loss achieved by
SFT using (3.1). We notice a persistent quality function that is both
monotonically decreasing and convex. gap between the groundtruth
response y from SSFT and the For example, a linear loss function ℓ(t) =
−t reduces (4.2) LLM-generated response y′ ∼ pθ (·\|x) (refer to Figure
1). to the minimization version of (4.1). However, the use of This
disparity indicates that there is still room for improve- a linear loss
function results in an unbounded objective ment over pθ0 . Therefore, we
propose to use the synthetic value, which, during continuous training,
leads to a negative data generated by the LLM to enhance LLM’s
performance infinite value of f (x, y′ ) on the opponent player’s
responses. starting from pθ0 iteratively. Therefore, in our work, we
choose the logistic loss function ℓ(t) := log(1+exp(−t)) for its
non-negativity, smoothness, 4.1 Self-Play Fine-Tuning (SPIN) and
exponentially decaying tail as t → ∞. Such a choice of loss function
aids in preventing the excessive growth in Let us consider a two-player
game, where the main player’s the absolute value of f . objective is to
distinguish the responses generated by the LLM and those generated by
the human. Meanwhile, the Updating the Opponent Player. Previously we
have dis- opponent’s role is to generate responses that are indistin-
cussed the training of ft+1 given the opponent player’s guishable from
the human’s responses. The core of our distribution pθt . Now suppose we
have optimized our main method is the self-play mechanism, where both
the main player ft+1 that can distinguish pdata from pθt , within a cer-
player and the opponent are the same LLM, but from dif- tain function
class Ft , we elaborate how we get parameter ferent iterations. More
specifically, the opponent is the old θt+1 of the opponent player.
Specifically, when presented LLM from the previous iteration, and the
main player is the with two responses y and y′ to the same prompt x,
ft+1 new LLM to be learned in the current iteration. assesses the values
ft+1 (x, y) and ft+1 (x, y′ ). It then in- fers that the response with
the higher value is from the real In iteration t+1, the opponent is the
LLM from the previous data distribution pdata and the response with
lower value iteration, denoted by pθt , which generates responses y′ for
is attributed to the LLM pθt . Subsequently, the objective those prompts
x in the SFT dataset according to pθt (·\|x). of the opponent player is
to find a better LLM that gener- Our method, therefore, consists of the
following two steps at ates responses indistinguishable from pdata for
the main iteration t+1: (1) training the main player, and (2) updating
player. This is achieved by maximizing the expected value the opponent
player. Ex∼q(·),y∼p(·\|x) \[ft+1 (x, y)\]. In addition, to prevent
exces- Training the Main Player. We begin with illustrating how sive
deviation of pθt+1 from pθt and stabilize the self-play, we expect a
main player is trained to distinguish LLM re- we incorporate a
Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization term. sponses from human responses.
Motivated by integral prob- Putting these together gives rise to the
following optimiza- ability metric (IPM) (Müller, 1997), we formulate
our ob- tion problem: jective function such that the main player ft+1
maximizes argmax Ex∼q(·),y∼p(·\|x) \[ft+1 (x, y)\] the expected value
gap between the target data distribution p

                                                                 4

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

              Chosen: ground truth completion                                            Rejected: model generation @Iter 0
         In Southampton, what is the most popular form of                       In Southampton, what is the most popular form of
         transportation for commuters?                                          transportation for commuters?

         I don't have access to current data. However,                          55% of commuters in Southampton use cars as
         historically, the most popular form of transporta-                     their primary mode of transportation, while 23%
         tion for commuters in southampton is buses. The                        use public transportation, 12% use bikes, and
         city also has a good network of trains and taxis.                      10% walk.

                                                       Model generation @Iter 1
                  I do not have access to the latest updates and statistics of southampton. However, based on
                  previous reports, the most popular form of transportation for commuters in southampton is
                  the public transport network, which includes buses, trains, and ferries. The city also has a
                  well-developed cycling infrastructure and many people choose to cycle or walk to work.
                  Additionally, private cars and taxis are also commonly used for commuting.

Figure 1. Example of ground truth completion compared to the fine-tuned
model generation at iteration 0 and 1. We can observe that the model
generation at iteration 0, although fluent, incorrectly quantifies
transportation preferences with specific percentages that are
potentially hallucinations. The model generation at iteration 1 provides
a qualitative summary of the transportation forms at Southampton without
specific percentage, aligning more closely with the ground truth while
adding more details.

                                                
                 − λEx∼q(·) KL p(·|x)||pθt (·|x) ,           (4.3)       argminθ∈Θ LSPIN (θ, θt ), where LSPIN is the training ob-
                                                                         jective defined as follows

where λ \> 0 is the regularization parameter. Notably, (4.3) pθ (y′ \|x)
pθ (y\|x) has a closed-form solution pb(·\|x): LSPIN = E ℓ λ log − λ log
, pθt (y\|x) pθt (y′ \|x) pb(y\|x) ∝ pθt (y\|x) exp λ−1 ft+1 (x, y) . 
(4.4) (4.7) where the expectation is computed over the distribution x ∼
It is worth noting that pb(·\|x) is not guaranteed to be belong q(·), y
∼ pdata (·\|x), y′ ∼ pθt (·\|x). We summarize the to the LLM space {pθ
(·\|x)\|θ ∈ Θ}. Since we hope that the iterative self-play process of
our method SPIN as follows, closed-form solution pb in the probability
space can be real- ized by an LLM with parameter θ, i.e., pθ (y\|x) =
pb(y\|x), pθ (·\|x) … → pθt (·\|x) → λ · log t+1 solving for pθ (y\|x) ∝
pθt (y\|x) exp λ−1 ft+1 (x, y)  pθ (·\|x) {z t \| {z } Opponent Player
at t gives ft+1 (x, y) = λ · log ppθθ (·\|x) \| } . This suggests the
fol- Main Player at t + 1 t (·\|x) lowing function class Ft for ft+1 : →
pθt+1 (·\|x) → … \| {z }   Opponent Player at t + 1 pθ (y\|x) Ft = λ ·
log θ∈Θ , (4.5) pθt (y\|x) Namely, the opponent player chosen from the
previous it- eration t is employed to train the main player at iteration
where Θ is the parameter space of LLMs being considered. t + 1,
resulting in the LLM parameterized by θt+1 . Then we Given the choice of
Ft in (4.5), optimizing (4.2) gives ft+1 determine the next opponent
player at iteration t + 1 by di- parameterized by θt+1 in the following
form: rectly copying the LLM parameter θt+1 , which is then used in
training the main player at iteration t + 2. The detailed pθt+1 (y\|x)
algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1. ft+1 (x, y) = λ · log . (4.6) pθt
(y\|x) 4.2 Comparison between SPIN and DPO Substituting (4.6) into (4.4)
yields pb(y\|x) = pθt+1 (y\|x). In In Section 4.1, we propose Self-Play
Fine-Tuning (SPIN) other words, θt+1 learned from (4.2) is exactly the
LLM with an end-to-end training objective (4.7) for each iter- parameter
for our ideal opponent selection. ation. (4.7) bears resemblance to
direct preference opti- End-to-end Training Objective. We integrate the
previ- mization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) for RL fine-tuning. ously
discussed two steps into a single end-to-end train- However, SPIN and
DPO are fundamentally different. ing objective with an update rule of
θt+1 . Specifically, DPO is based on the Bradley-Terry (BT) model: p(y1
≻ exp(r ∗ (x,y1 )) plugging (4.5) into (4.2) arrives at the update rule
θt+1 = y2 \|x) = exp(r∗ (x,y ∗ 1 ))+exp(r (x,y2 )) , and maximizes the

                                                                     5

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Algorithm 1 Self-Play Fine-Tuning (SPIN) assumption of the objective
function ℓ, we show that the Input: {(xi , yi )}i∈\[N \] : SFT Dataset,
pθ0 : LLM with global optimum is obtained if and only if parameter θt
gen- parameter θ0 , T : Number of iterations. erates data distribution.
We summarize our assumptions as for t = 0, . . . , T − 1 do follows: for
i = 1, . . . N do Assumption 5.1. The loss function ℓ(t) : R → R is
Generate synthetic data yi′ ∼ pθt (·\|xi ). monotonically decreasing,
i.e., ∀t, ℓ′ (t) ≤ 0 and satisfies end for  ℓ′ (0) \< 0. In addition,
ℓ(t) is a convex function. i \|xi ) Update θt+1 = argminθ∈Θ i∈\[N \] ℓ λ
log ppθθ (y P t (yi \|xi ) − p (y′ \|x )  λ log pθθ (yi′ \|xii ) .
Assumption 5.1 holds for a wide range of loss functions t i commonly
used in machine learning, including correlation end for loss ℓ(t) = 1 −
t, hinge loss ℓ(t) = max(0, 1 − t), ex- Output: θT . ponential loss ℓ(t)
= exp(−t) and logistic loss ℓ(t) = log-likelihood of p(y1 ≻ y2 \|x) by
direct policy optimiza- log(1 + exp(−t)). Under Assumptions 5.1, we
present the tion without explicit reward estimation. In contrast, SPIN
following theorem, which is pivotal in understanding the relies on
maximizing the IPM to compete with an increas- optimization dynamics of
our method. ingly stronger version of itself. More detailed comparisons
Theorem 5.2. Under Assumption 5.1, suppose there exists are highlighted
as follows: pθ (·\|x) = pdata (·\|x), then we have that 1. DPO does not
inherently lead to iterative training. More • (Sufficiency) If pθt
(·\|x) = pdata (·\|x), then θt is the specifically, DPO aims to match
the preference prob- global minimum of (4.7) for any λ ≥ 0. ability p(y1
≻ y2 \|x) induced from its reward model • (Necessity) If pθt (·\|x) ̸=
pdata (·\|x), there exists an appro- with the data distribution pdata
(y1 ≻ y2 \|x) in a single priately chosen λ, such that θt is not the
global minimum iteration. On the contrary, SPIN’s self-play mechanism of
(4.7). naturally leads to an iterative training procedure. SPIN
iteratively refines its generation distribution pθ (y\|x) to Remark 5.3.
Theorem 5.2 suggests that under certain con- match the target
distribution pdata (y\|x) across iterations. ditions, the optimization
process of our method naturally 2. SPIN only requires the SFT dataset,
represented by pairs stops at the point pθ (·\|x) = pdata (·\|x),
implying the effec- (x, y). In contrast, DPO necessitates a preference
dataset, tiveness of our approach in aligning the LLM’s distribution
represented by (x, yw , yl ), where yw and yl denote the with the target
data distribution. Moreover, Theorem 5.2 winner (chosen) and loser
(rejected) responses, respec- also indicates that the optimization
process only stops when tively. Moreover, SPIN can be applied between
SFT and the global optimality is achieved, i.e., the LLM’s distribution
RL fine-tuning. aligns with the target data distribution. 3. In SPIN, we
can choose different loss functions ℓ which only need to be convex and
decreasing (detailed later For the logistic loss function ℓ(t) = log(1 +
exp(−t)), the in Theorem 5.2), which includes correlation loss, hinge
following theorem gives a more precise characterization loss, and
logistic loss. Only when ℓ is chosen as the lo- of the opponent player,
enabling a better understanding of gistic loss would the training
objective of SPIN become SPIN. similar to that of DPO. Theorem 5.4.
Consider the choice of logistic loss Recently, Xu et al. (2023) proposed
to use iterative prefer- ℓ(t) = log(1 + exp(−t)) in SPIN. Suppose that
1/λ ence optimization with the Pairwise Cringe Loss (PCO), and pθt
(y\|x) pdata (y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) lies in the LLM space generalized DPO to
iterative DPO. Concurrent to our work, {pθ (y\|x)\|θ ∈ Θ} and θt+1 is
global minimum of Yuan et al. (2024) further proposed a framework named
LSPIN (θ, θt ), then the opponent player at iteration t + 1
“self-rewarding language models”, which leverages the LLM satisfies
itself as the reward model to provide the preference feed- 1/λ back, and
employs iterative DPO to train the LLM. Com- pθt+1 (y\|x) ∝ pθt (y\|x)
pdata (y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) . pared with Xu et al. (2023); Yuan et
al. (2024), SPIN’s Remark 5.5. According to Theorem 5.4, the model
update self-assessment is implicit, as no intermediate reward or from
pθt (y\|x) to pθt+1 (y\|x) tends to increase the probabil- preference
feedback is required. ity pθt+1 (y\|x) when pθt (y\|x) is less than
pdata (y\|x), and decrease it when pθt (y\|x) is greater than pdata
(y\|x). Thus, 5 Theoretical Analysis Theorem 5.4 further confirms that
our method’s optimiza- tion process naturally converges to the point
where pθ (·\|x) In this section, we provide a theoretical analysis for
Algo- equals pdata (·\|x). The update of the opponent player is con- 1/λ
rithm 1 in Section 4. Under monotonicity and convexity trolled by pdata
(y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) , which is regulated by

                                                                  6

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

the factor 1/λ. A smaller λ results in a larger change of the tation
details to Appendix B with detailed evaluation setting opponent player,
while a larger λ leads to a smaller change. adopted by both the
leaderboard and our experiments. Therefore, as pθ (·\|x) approaches
pdata (·\|x), increasing λ enhances the stability of LLM training. This
observation 6.2 SPIN Effectively Improves Benchmark aligns with (4.3),
where λ is the regularization parameter Performance of the KL
regularization that is employed to control the deviation of the opponent
player. HuggingFace Open LLM Benchmark 63 63.16 62.97 6 Experiments 62
62.12

                                                                             Average Accuracy (%)

This section provides a detailed empirical analysis of SPIN. Our
findings highlight several key points: (1) SPIN 61 60.80 markedly
enhances model performance across a wide range 60 of evaluation
benchmarks by breaking the limit of SFT; (2) even without introducing
new human annotated data, 59 SPIN at iteration 0 achieves performance on
par to DPO training that utilizes even more data; (3) iterative training
58 58.14 is a necessary component in SPIN as it breaks the limit of SFT
SPIN SPIN SPIN SPIN multi-epoch training. iter-0 iter-1 iter-2 iter-3

6.1 Experiment Setup Figure 2. The average score of SPIN at different
itera- tions on the HuggingFace Open LLM leaderboard datasets. Model and
Datasets. In this study, we adopt For “SFT”, we report the performance
of our base model zephyr-7b-sft-full as our base model. This model
zephyr-7b-sft-full, which has been fine-tuned on the derives from the
pre-trained Mistral-7B (Jiang et al., 2023) same dataset we use to
generate synthetic data. and has been further fine-tuned on the SFT
dataset Ultra- In Figure 2, we demonstrate the effectiveness of SPIN us-
chat200k1 by HuggingFace. Ultrachat200k represents a ing HuggingFace
Open LLM Leaderboard as the evalua- high-quality 200k subset of the
larger UltraChat (Ding et al., tion. In Figure 3, we compare the
performance of our fine- 2023) corpus, which comprises approximately
1.4M dia- tuned model by SPIN after iterations 0 to 3 with the base
logues produced using OpenAI’s Turbo APIs. From Ultra- model
zephyr-7b-sft-full on each task included in Chat200k, We randomly sample
50k prompts and use the the leaderboard. Detailed performances are
presented in base model to generate the synthetic responses. We subse-
Table 4 in Appendix B. We can observe that SPIN ex- quently follow the
optimization method described in Section hibits remarkable effectiveness
in improving the model’s 4.1 for further training. In multiple
iterations, we leverage performance by further leveraging the SFT
dataset, on the synthetic data from the most recent iteration and add
which the base model has already been fully fine-tuned. to the newly
generated synthetic data, therefore resulting At iteration 0, where
model responses are generated from in a synthetic dataset size of 50k at
iteration 0 and 100k at zephyr-7b-sft-full, we observe an overall
improve- iteration 1, 2 and 3. At each iteration, we train our model
ment of 2.66% on the average score. The improvement for 2 epochs. is
particularly significant on the TruthfulQA and GSM8k Evaluation. We
employed the widely used Huggingface benchmarks, with improvement
exceeding 5% and 10% re- Open LLM Leaderboard (Beeching et al., 2023) as
our eval- spectively. At iteration 1, we employ the LLM model from
uation benchmark, using the same Language Model Eval- iteration 0 to
generate new responses for SPIN, adhering uation Harness library (Gao et
al., 2023b). This leader- to the procedure outlined in Algorithm 1. This
iteration board encompasses 6 different datasets, each focusing yields
further enhancements of 1.32% on average, and es- on a a specific
capability of LLMs. Collectively, these pecially significant on the Arc
Challenge and TruthfulQA datasets provide a thorough assessment
framework, evalu- benchmarks. Subsequent iterations continue this trend
of ating LLMs on commonsense reasoning (Arc (Clark et al., incremental
improvement across various tasks. Meanwhile, 2018), HellaSwag (Zellers
et al., 2019), Winogrande (Sak- the improvement at iteration t + 1 is
naturally smaller than aguchi et al., 2021)), multi-task language
understanding that at iteration t. As the iterative training progresses,
the (MMLU(Hendrycks et al., 2020)), human falsehood mimic degree of
improvement gradually approaches zero, suggest- (TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,
2021)) and math problem solving ing that the model has reached a
limiting point in the last (GSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021)). We leave
further implemen- iteration. 1 https://huggingface.co/datasets/
Comparison with DPO. zephyr-7b-beta is a model
HuggingFaceH4/ultrachat_200k derived from zephyr-7b-sft-full, trained
with DPO

                                                                 7

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

on approximately 62k preference data. This data, the Ultra- SPIN over
multiple epochs at iteration 0. It is evident that Feedback Binarized
dataset (Cui et al., 2023)2 , comprises the most substantial improvement
occurs during the first both chosen and rejected completions evaluated
by GPT-4. two epochs, followed by only modest gains in subsequent We
note that, DPO requires either human input or advanced epochs. Notably,
SPIN exhibits robustness and stability; ex- language model feedback to
determine the preference, mak- tending the training duration does not
diminish performance ing data generation a rather expensive procedure.
In contrast, but rather maintains a rather consistent level. Neverthe-
our SPIN only requires the initial model itself. Moreover, less, the
observation suggests an inherent limitation to the unlike DPO which
requires new data source, our method performance achievable within a
single iteration, thereby exclusively leverages the existing SFT
dataset. In Figure 3, underscoring the necessity for iterative training.
As shown we show the performance comparison of SPIN at iterations by the
test performance achieved at iteration 1 in the fig- 0 and 1 (employing
50k SFT data) with DPO training, from ures, extending the training in
iteration 0 fails to reach the the same SFT checkpoint. We can observe
that, while DPO performance comparable to iteration 1. leverages more
data from new sources, SPIN based on the existing SFT data can already
achieve comparable average 7 Conclusion and Discussion performance to
DPO training at iteration 0. From iteration 1, SPIN even surpasses the
performance of DPO on the This paper introduces a novel fine-tuning
method SPIN, to leaderboard benchmark. convert a weak LLM to a strong
LLM by unleashing the full power of human-annotated data. Central to
this method is a 6.3 Ablation Studies self-play mechanism, wherein a
main player (the LLM) is fine-tuned to differentiate the responses of
opponent player In this subsection, we examine the effect of synthetic
dataset (the LLM from previous iteration) from the target data dis- size
and training epochs within an iteration. Our analysis tribution, and the
LLM is iteratively aligned with the target demonstrates the
effectiveness of the synthetic data used by data distribution.
Therefore, SPIN facilitates the LLM’s SPIN compared to the SFT data, as
well as the necessity iterative self-evaluation and enhancement through
self-play. of iterative training in SPIN. In Appendix B, we present In
comparison to supervised fine-tuning and RL fine-tuning assessment of
SPIN on additional benchmark tasks. methods, SPIN enables the LLM to
self-improve without additional human data or feedback from stronger
LLMs. Training Size. We investigate the effect of varying training
Empirical results demonstrate that SPIN significantly en- data size on
the performance of SPIN. In Figure 5, we hances LLM performance across
diverse benchmarks, even demonstrate the effect of training size for
SPIN during it- outperforming models trained with additional human data
eration 0 and additionally compare with SFT with the full or AI
feedback. original dataset. Specifically, for the SFT baseline, we fully
fine-tune Mistral-7B on Ultrachat200k for three epochs and Limitation
and Future Work. Our theoretical results report first epoch performance
as the starting point (with demonstrate that the optimization process of
SPIN con- x-axis 0) in the figure for SFT. For SPIN, we report the
verges if and only if the LLM’s distribution aligns with
zephyr-7b-sft-full checkpoint as the starting point, pdata . Therefore,
our study focuses on a fixed target data which has also been fine-tuned
on Ultrachat200k for one distribution generated by humans, which
inherently imposes epoch. We select the training size of SPIN at
iteration 0 a ceiling on the performance of fine-tuned LLM. Explor- to
be 14k, 26k, and 50k and generate the data accordingly, ing the
dynamically changing target data distribution is an ensuring that the
larger dataset encompasses the smaller important direction to overcome
this limitation and elevate dataset. The performance of SPIN was then
evaluated after the LLM’s performance beyond this ceiling or even to a 1
epoch of self-play fine-tuning for each training size. We super-human
level. Moreover, considering the resource can observe that, while SPIN
results in notable improve- demands of synthetic data generation,
another promising ment with increasing training sizes, SFT on further
epochs 2 avenue for further exploration is to reduce the volume of and 3
fails to yield more than 1% improvement. Additional required synthetic
data. results are deferred to Appendix B. Iterative Training v.s.
Training for More Epochs. We Acknowledgement further study the training
within iteration 0 and compare We thank the anonymous reviewers and area
chair for their with the performance achieved in iteration 1,
particularly helpful comments. ZC, YD, HY, KJ, and QG are supported
contrasting the test performance obtained from extended in part by the
National Science Foundation CAREER Award training duration with that
from next iteration. Figure 4 de- 1906169, IIS-2008981, CHE-2247426 and
the Sloan Re- picts the performance trajectory of the model trained
using search Fellowship. The views and conclusions contained 2
https://huggingface.co/datasets/ in this paper are those of the authors
and should not be HuggingFaceH4/ultrafeedback_binarized interpreted as
representing any funding agencies.

                                                                 8

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

                               80                                                                                                                                                       Zephyr-SFT
                                                                                                                                                                                        Zephyr-DPO
                               70                                                                                                                                                       SPIN-iter-0
                               60                                                                                                                                                       SPIN-iter-1
                                                                                                                                                                                        SPIN-iter-2
                               50                                                                                                                                                       SPIN-iter-3
                      Scores   40
                               30
                               20
                               10
                                0
                                                   Arc      TruthfulQA Winogrande                     GSM8k       Hellaswag     MMLU                      Average

Figure 3. Performance comparison with DPO training across the six
benchmark datasets. Self-play at iteration 0 achieves comparable
performance to DPO training with 62k new data. At iteration 1, self-play
has already surpassed DPO training on the majority of datasets.

                     65                                                                                                                                          62
                                                                                             54




                                                                                                                                          Average Accuracy (%)
                     64                                                                      52                                                                  61

    Accuracy (%)                                                              Accuracy (%)
                     63                                                                      50
                                                                                                                                                                 60
                     62                                                                      48
                                                          iter 0                             46                        iter 0                                    59                    iter 0
                     61
                                                          iter 1 (epoch 2)                   44                        iter 1 (epoch 2)                                                iter 1 (epoch 2)
                                                                                                                                                                 58
                               0            1        2      3      4     5                        0           1   2      3      4     5                               0   1       2      3      4     5
                                                      Epoch                                                        Epoch                                                           Epoch
                                       (a) Arc Challenge.                                                 (b) TruthfulQA.                                                     (c) Average.

Figure 4. The SPIN training dynamics of zephyr-7b-sft-full on the 50k
synthetic data with regard to the number of training epochs during
iteration 0. We can observe that iterative training is pivotal as
training for more epochs during iteration 0 reaches a limit and cannot
surpass iteration 1.

                                                     Performance Comparison                                           Impact Statement
                    61.0                   60.83                                                  SFT
                                                                                                  SPIN
                    60.5
                                                                                                                      This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
                                    60.16                                                                             of Large Language Models. We believe that our work con-
                    60.0                                         59.82

    Average Score
                                                                                                                      tribute meaningfully to the field, specifically on leveraging
                                   59.55
                    59.5                                                                              59.27           synthetic data to enhance LLM without the requirement for
                               59.04                                                                                  human preference annotations. The synthetic data generated
                    59.0
                                                                                                                      by SPIN may be used to further augment the training of
                    58.5
                               58.14                                                                                  various language models. Moreover, SPIN demonstrated
                    58.0     0                                                                                        a substantial improvement in LLMs’ capabilities, opening
                                                              200k                                 400k
                           14k
                           26k
                           50k
                                                           Training Size
                                                                                                                      new avenues for their application in various downstream
                                                                                                                      tasks. This advancement underscores the transformative po-

Figure 5. The scaling effect of training size of SPIN compared to
tential of LLM fine-tuning in both technological and societal SFT on the
average score of Open LLM Leaderboard. For SPIN, contexts. we consider
training data of sizes 14k, 26k and 50k where the larger dataset
contains the smaller dataset. The starting point for References SPIN
(with x-axis 0) is the zephyr-7b-sft-full checkpoint, which has been
fine-tuned on Ultrachat200k for 1 epoch. We Anil, R., Dai, A. M., Firat,
O., Johnson, M., Lepikhin, report the model performance trained for 1
epoch with SPIN on D., Passos, A., Shakeri, S., Taropa, E., Bailey, P.,
Chen, the varying sizes of dataset. We additionally compare with SFT,
Z., et al. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv preprint where we fine-tune
Mistral-7B on Ultrachat200k for 3 consecutive arXiv:2305.10403, 2023.
epochs and report the model performance at the first epoch as the
starting point (with x-axis 0). Anthony, T., Tian, Z., and Barber, D.
Thinking fast and slow

                                                                                                                  9

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

with deep learning and tree search. Advances in neural Chen, M., Tworek,
J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. d. O., information processing
systems, 30, 2017. Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N.,
Brockman, G., et al. Evaluating large language models trained on
Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., and Bottou, L. Wasserstein gen- code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021. erative adversarial networks. In
International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.
Cheng, P., Yang, Y., Li, J., Dai, Y., and Du, N. Adversarial preference
optimization, 2023. Austin, J., Odena, A., Nye, M., Bosma, M.,
Michalewski, H., Dohan, D., Jiang, E., Cai, C., Terry, M., Le, Q., et
al. Chiang, W.-L., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Sheng, Y., Wu, Z., Zhang, Program
synthesis with large language models. arXiv H., Zheng, L., Zhuang, S.,
Zhuang, Y., Gonzalez, J. E., preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021. Stoica,
I., and Xing, E. P. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with
90%\* chatgpt quality, March 2023. Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K.,
Askell, A., Chen, A., Das- Sarma, N., Drain, D., Fort, S., Ganguli, D.,
Henighan, T., Christiano, P. F., Leike, J., Brown, T., Martic, M., Legg,
et al. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with rein- S., and
Amodei, D. Deep reinforcement learning from forcement learning from
human feedback. arXiv preprint human preferences. Advances in neural
information pro- arXiv:2204.05862, 2022a. cessing systems, 30, 2017.

Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion, J., Chung, H. W.,
Hou, L., Longpre, S., Zoph, B., Tay, Y., Jones, A., Chen, A., Goldie,
A., Mirhoseini, A., McKin- Fedus, W., Li, Y., Wang, X., Dehghani, M.,
Brahma, non, C., et al. Constitutional ai: Harmlessness from ai S., et
al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models. feedback. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Bansal, T., Pachocki, J., Sidor, S., Sutskever, I., and Mor- Cirik, V.,
Hovy, E., and Morency, L.-P. Visualizing and datch, I. Emergent
complexity via multi-agent competi- understanding curriculum learning
for long short-term tion. In International Conference on Learning
Represen- memory networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.06204, tations,
2018. 2016.

Beeching, E., Fourrier, C., Habib, N., Han, S., Lambert, Clark, P.,
Cowhey, I., Etzioni, O., Khot, T., Sabharwal, A., N., Rajani, N.,
Sanseviero, O., Tunstall, L., and Wolf, T. Schoenick, C., and Tafjord,
O. Think you have solved Open llm leaderboard, 2023. question answering?
try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457,
2018. bench authors, B. Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and
extrapolating the capabilities of language models. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju,
V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2023. ISSN Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J.,
Nakano, 2835-8856. R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word
problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. Bengio, Y., Louradour,
J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J. Cui, G., Yuan, L., Ding, N., Yao, G.,
Zhu, W., Ni, Y., Xie, G., Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the
26th annual Liu, Z., and Sun, M. Ultrafeedback: Boosting language
international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48, models with
high-quality feedback, 2023. 2009. Dao, T. Flashattention-2: Faster
attention with bet- Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan,
J. D., ter parallelism and work partitioning. arXiv preprint Dhariwal,
P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P., Sastry, G., arXiv:2307.08691, 2023.
Askell, A., et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 33: Deng, Y., Zhang, W., Chen,
Z., and Gu, Q. Rephrase and 1877–1901, 2020. respond: Let large language
models ask better questions for themselves. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.04205, 2023. Bubeck, S., Chandrasekaran, V., Eldan, R.,
Gehrke, J., Horvitz, E., Kamar, E., Lee, P., Lee, Y. T., Li, Y., Ding,
N., Chen, Y., Xu, B., Qin, Y., Zheng, Z., Hu, S., Liu, Lundberg, S., et
al. Sparks of artificial general intel- Z., Sun, M., and Zhou, B.
Enhancing chat language mod- ligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint els by scaling high-quality instructional conversations.
arXiv:2303.12712, 2023. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14233, 2023. Burns,
C., Izmailov, P., Kirchner, J. H., Baker, B., Gao, L., Frei, S., Zou,
D., Chen, Z., and Gu, Q. Self-training converts Aschenbrenner, L., Chen,
Y., Ecoffet, A., Joglekar, M., weak learners to strong learners in
mixture models. In Leike, J., et al. Weak-to-strong generalization:
Eliciting International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and strong
capabilities with weak supervision. 2023. Statistics, pp. 8003–8021.
PMLR, 2022.

                                                                 10

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Freund, Y. Boosting a weak learning algorithm by majority. Lample, G.,
Saulnier, L., et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint Information and
computation, 121(2):256–285, 1995. arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

Freund, Y. and Schapire, R. E. A decision-theoretic general-
Jolicoeur-Martineau, A. The relativistic discriminator: a ization of
on-line learning and an application to boosting. key element missing
from standard gan. arXiv preprint Journal of computer and system
sciences, 55(1):119–139, arXiv:1807.00734, 2018. 1997. Josifoski, M.,
Sakota, M., Peyrard, M., and West, R. Ex- Gao, L., Schulman, J., and
Hilton, J. Scaling laws for reward ploiting asymmetry for synthetic
training data generation: model overoptimization. In International
Conference on Synthie and the case of information extraction. arXiv
Machine Learning, pp. 10835–10866. PMLR, 2023a. preprint
arXiv:2303.04132, 2023. Gao, L., Tow, J., Abbasi, B., Biderman, S.,
Black, S., DiPofi, Kearns, M. and Valiant, L. Cryptographic limitations
on A., Foster, C., Golding, L., Hsu, J., Le Noac’h, A., Li, H., learning
boolean formulae and finite automata. Journal McDonell, K., Muennighoff,
N., Ociepa, C., Phang, J., of the ACM (JACM), 41(1):67–95, 1994.
Reynolds, L., Schoelkopf, H., Skowron, A., Sutawika, L., Tang, E.,
Thite, A., Wang, B., Wang, K., and Zou, A. A Kou, Y., Chen, Z., Cao, Y.,
and Gu, Q. How does semi- framework for few-shot language model
evaluation, 12 supervised learning with pseudo-labelers work? a case
2023b. study. In The Eleventh International Conference on Goodfellow,
I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Learning Representations,
2022. Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., and Bengio, Y. Kumar,
M., Packer, B., and Koller, D. Self-paced learning Generative
adversarial nets. Advances in neural informa- for latent variable
models. Advances in neural informa- tion processing systems, 27, 2014.
tion processing systems, 23, 2010. Grandvalet, Y. and Bengio, Y.
Semi-supervised learning by entropy minimization. Advances in neural
information Lanctot, M., Zambaldi, V., Gruslys, A., Lazaridou, A.,
processing systems, 17, 2004. Tuyls, K., Pérolat, J., Silver, D., and
Graepel, T. A uni- fied game-theoretic approach to multiagent
reinforcement Gugger, S., Debut, L., Wolf, T., Schmid, P., Mueller, Z.,
learning. Advances in neural information processing Mangrulkar, S., Sun,
M., and Bossan, B. Accelerate: systems, 30, 2017. Training and inference
at scale made simple, efficient and adaptable., 2022. Lee, D.-H.
Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi- supervised learning method
for deep neural networks. In Gulrajani, I., Ahmed, F., Arjovsky, M.,
Dumoulin, V., and ICML Challenges in Representation Learning Workshop,
Courville, A. C. Improved training of wasserstein gans. 2013. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. Lee, H., Phatale,
S., Mansoor, H., Lu, K., Mesnard, T., Bishop, C., Carbune, V., and
Rastogi, A. Rlaif: Scal- Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A.,
Mazeika, ing reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai M.,
Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring mas- feedback. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.00267, 2023. sive multitask language understanding. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020. Lee, Y. J. and Grauman, K. Learning the
easy things first: Self-paced visual category discovery. In CVPR 2011,
pp. Hernandez-Leal, P., Kartal, B., and Taylor, M. E. Is mul- 1721–1728.
IEEE, 2011. tiagent deep reinforcement learning the answer or the
question? a brief survey. learning, 21:22, 2018. Lewkowycz, A.,
Andreassen, A., Dohan, D., Dyer, E., Michalewski, H., Ramasesh, V.,
Slone, A., Anil, C., Hinton, G., Srivastava, N., and Swersky, K. Neural
networks Schlag, I., Gutman-Solo, T., et al. Solving quantitative for
machine learning lecture 6a overview of mini-batch reasoning problems
with language models. Advances in gradient descent. Cited on, 14(8):2,
2012. Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:3843–3857, Ho, J. and
Ermon, S. Generative adversarial imitation learn- 2022. ing. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. Li, Y., Choi, D.,
Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J., Leblond, R., Eccles, T.,
Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Dal Lago, Jiang, A. Q., Sablayrolles, A.,
Mensch, A., Bamford, C., A., et al. Competition-level code generation
with alpha- Chaplot, D. S., Casas, D. d. l., Bressand, F., Lengyel, G.,
code. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.

                                                                 11

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Li, Y., Bubeck, S., Eldan, R., Giorno, A. D., Gunasekar, Ouyang, L., Wu,
J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright, C., S., and Lee, Y. T. Textbooks
are all you need ii: phi-1.5 Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama,
K., Ray, A., technical report, 2023. et al. Training language models to
follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information
Lin, S., Hilton, J., and Evans, O. Truthfulqa: Measuring Processing
Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022. how models mimic human falsehoods. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.07958, 2021. Prasad, A., Stengel-Eskin, E., and
Bansal, M. Rephrase, aug- ment, reason: Visual grounding of questions
for vision- Liu, B., Bubeck, S., Eldan, R., Kulkarni, J., Li, Y.,
Nguyen, language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05861, A., Ward, R.,
and Zhang, Y. Tinygsm: achieving\> 80% 2023. on gsm8k with small
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09241, 2023. Radford, A., Wu,
J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., Liu, C., He, S., Liu, K., Zhao, J.,
et al. Curriculum learning Sutskever, I., et al. Language models are
unsupervised for natural answer generation. In IJCAI, pp. 4223–4229,
multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019. 2018. Rafailov, R.,
Sharma, A., Mitchell, E., Ermon, S., Manning, Liu, F., Ge, S., and Wu,
X. Competence-based multimodal C. D., and Finn, C. Direct preference
optimization: Your curriculum learning for medical report generation. In
Pro- language model is secretly a reward model. arXiv preprint ceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association arXiv:2305.18290, 2023.
for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol- Rajbhandari, S., Rasley,
J., Ruwase, O., and He, Y. Zero: ume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3001–3012,
2021. Memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. In
SC20: International Conference for High Per- Luo, H., Sun, Q., Xu, C.,
Zhao, P., Lou, J., Tao, C., formance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis, Geng, X., Lin, Q., Chen, S., and Zhang, D. Wizard- pp. 1–16.
IEEE, 2020. math: Empowering mathematical reasoning for large lan- guage
models via reinforced evol-instruct. arXiv preprint Roziere, B.,
Gehring, J., Gloeckle, F., Sootla, S., Gat, I., arXiv:2308.09583, 2023.
Tan, X. E., Adi, Y., Liu, J., Remez, T., Rapin, J., et al. Code llama:
Open foundation models for code. arXiv Mao, X., Li, Q., Xie, H., Lau, R.
Y., Wang, Z., and preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023. Paul Smolley, S.
Least squares generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE international con- Sakaguchi, K., Bras, R. L., Bhagavatula, C., and
Choi, Y. ference on computer vision, pp. 2794–2802, 2017. Winogrande: An
adversarial winograd schema challenge at scale. Communications of the
ACM, 64(9):99–106, Mihaylov, T., Clark, P., Khot, T., and Sabharwal, A.
Can a 2021. suit of armor conduct electricity? a new dataset for open
book question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Samuel, A. L. Some
studies in machine learning using Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language the game of checkers. IBM Journal of research and
Processing, pp. 2381–2391, 2018. development, 3(3):210–229, 1959.
Mishra, S., Khashabi, D., Baral, C., and Hajishirzi, H. Cross- Samuel,
A. L. Some studies in machine learning using task generalization via
natural language crowdsourcing the game of checkers. IBM Journal of
research and instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08773, 2021.
development, 44(1.2):206–226, 2000. Mroueh, Y. and Sercu, T. Fisher gan.
Advances in neural Saunders, W., Yeh, C., Wu, J., Bills, S., Ouyang, L.,
Ward, J., information processing systems, 30, 2017. and Leike, J.
Self-critiquing models for assisting human Müller, A. Integral
probability metrics and their generating evaluators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.05802, 2022. classes of functions. Advances in applied
probability, 29 Schapire, R. E. The strength of weak learnability.
Machine (2):429–443, 1997. learning, 5:197–227, 1990. Muller, P.,
Omidshafiei, S., Rowland, M., Tuyls, K., Perolat, J., Liu, S., Hennes,
D., Marris, L., Lanctot, M., Hughes, Silver, D., Hubert, T.,
Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Lai, E., et al. A generalized
training approach for multiagent M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., Sifre, L.,
Kumaran, D., Grae- learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12823, 2019. pel,
T., et al. Mastering chess and shogi by self-play with a general
reinforcement learning algorithm. arXiv OpenAI. Gpt-4 technical report,
2023. preprint arXiv:1712.01815, 2017a.

                                                                 12

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, et
al. Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task I., Huang, A.,
Guez, A., Hubert, T., Baker, L., Lai, M., generalization. In
International Conference on Learning Bolton, A., et al. Mastering the
game of go without Representations, 2022. human knowledge. nature,
550(7676):354–359, 2017b. Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Chung, J.,
Mathieu, M., Singh, A., Co-Reyes, J. D., Agarwal, R., Anand, A., Patil,
Jaderberg, M., Czarnecki, W., Dudzik, A., Huang, A., P., Liu, P. J.,
Harrison, J., Lee, J., Xu, K., Parisi, A., Georgiev, P., Powell, R.,
Ewalds, T., Horgan, D., Kroiss, et al. Beyond human data: Scaling
self-training for M., Danihelka, I., Agapiou, J., Oh, J., Dalibard, V.,
problem-solving with language models. arXiv preprint Choi, D., Sifre,
L., Sulsky, Y., Vezhnevets, S., Molloy, arXiv:2312.06585, 2023. J., Cai,
T., Budden, D., Paine, T., Gulcehre, C., Wang, Z., Pfaff, T., Pohlen,
T., Yogatama, D., Cohen, J., McK- Soviany, P., Ionescu, R. T., Rota, P.,
and Sebe, N. Cur- inney, K., Smith, O., Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T., Apps,
C., riculum learning: A survey. International Journal of Kavukcuoglu,
K., Hassabis, D., and Silver, D. AlphaS- Computer Vision,
130(6):1526–1565, 2022. tar: Mastering the Real-Time Strategy Game
StarCraft II, Spitkovsky, V. I., Alshawi, H., and Jurafsky, D. Baby
steps: 2019. How “less is more” in unsupervised dependency parsing. In
NIPS 2009 Workshop on Grammar Induction, Repre- Wei, J., Wang, X.,
Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., sentation of Language and Language
Learning, 2009. Chi, E., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., et al. Chain-of-thought
prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Stiennon, N.,
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Ziegler, D., Lowe, R., Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35: Voss, C., Radford, A., Amodei, D.,
and Christiano, 24824–24837, 2022. P. F. Learning to summarize with
human feedback. Ad- vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
Wu, J., Liang, Y., Akbari, H., Wang, Z., Yu, C., et al. Scaling
3008–3021, 2020. multimodal pre-training via cross-modality gradient
har- monization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Taori, R.,
Gulrajani, I., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Li, X., Systems, 35:36161–36173,
2022. Guestrin, C., Liang, P., and Hashimoto, T. B. Stanford alpaca: An
instruction-following llama model, 2023. Xu, J., Lee, A., Sukhbaatar,
S., and Weston, J. Some things are more cringe than others: Preference
opti- Tesauro, G. et al. Temporal difference learning and td- mization
with the pairwise cringe loss. arXiv preprint gammon. Communications of
the ACM, 38(3):58–68, arXiv:2312.16682, 2023. 1995.

Thoppilan, R., De Freitas, D., Hall, J., Shazeer, N., Kul- Yang, Y.,
Singh, A. K., Elhoushi, M., Mahmoud, A., Tiru- shreshtha, A., Cheng,
H.-T., Jin, A., Bos, T., Baker, L., mala, K., Gloeckle, F., Rozière, B.,
Wu, C.-J., Morcos, Du, Y., et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
appli- A. S., and Ardalani, N. Decoding data quality via syn- cations.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022. thetic corruptions:
Embedding-guided pruning of code data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02418,
2023. Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Almahairi, A.,
Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., Batra, S., Bhargava, P., Yu, L., Jiang, W.,
Shi, H., Yu, J., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Kwok, Bhosale, S., et al. Llama 2:
Open foundation and fine- J. T., Li, Z., Weller, A., and Liu, W.
Metamath: Boot- tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
strap your own mathematical questions for large language 2023. models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12284, 2023.

Tunstall, L., Beeching, E., Lambert, N., Rajani, N., Ra- Yuan, W., Pang,
R. Y., Cho, K., Sukhbaatar, S., Xu, J., sul, K., Belkada, Y., Huang, S.,
von Werra, L., Fourrier, and Weston, J. Self-rewarding language models.
arXiv C., Habib, N., et al. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm preprint
arXiv:2401.10020, 2024. alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944,
2023a. Yuan, Z., Yuan, H., Li, C., Dong, G., Tan, C., and Zhou,
Tunstall, L., Beeching, E., Lambert, N., Rajani, N., Rush, C. Scaling
relationship on learning mathematical rea- A. M., and Wolf, T. The
alignment handbook, 2023b. soning with large language models. arXiv
preprint Vapnik, V. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer
arXiv:2308.01825, 2023. science & business media, 1999. Zellers, R.,
Holtzman, A., Bisk, Y., Farhadi, A., and Choi, Victor, S., Albert, W.,
Colin, R., Stephen, B., Lintang, S., Y. Hellaswag: Can a machine really
finish your sentence? Zaid, A., Antoine, C., Arnaud, S., Arun, R.,
Manan, D., arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07830, 2019.

                                                                 13

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Zhang, D., Meng, D., Li, C., Jiang, L., Zhao, Q., and Han, J. A
self-paced multiple-instance learning framework for co-saliency
detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, pp. 594– 602, 2015. Zhang, X., Kumar, G., Khayrallah,
H., Murray, K., Gwin- nup, J., Martindale, M. J., McNamee, P., Duh, K.,
and Carpuat, M. An empirical exploration of curriculum learning for
neural machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.00739, 2018.
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z., Zhuang, Y.,
Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E., et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with
mt-bench and chatbot arena. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05685, 2023.
Ziegler, D. M., Stiennon, N., Wu, J., Brown, T. B., Radford, A., Amodei,
D., Christiano, P., and Irving, G. Fine-tuning language models from
human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08593, 2019.

                                                                  14

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

A Further Related Work Curriculum Learning. In deep learning, it has
been observed that training models using data samples arranged in a
strategically meaningful order can lead to improved performance compared
to training on randomly shuffled data. This approach is commonly known
as curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009; Soviany et al., 2022).
Initial studies in curriculum learning introduced efficient algorithms
that adhere to an ‘easy-to-hard’ progression (Spitkovsky et al., 2009;
Kumar et al., 2010; Lee & Grauman, 2011; Zhang et al., 2015). In the
field of Natural Language Processing (NLP), criteria such as sentence
length and term frequency are commonly utilized (Cirik et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2018). More recent developments include
the application of curriculum learning algorithms in multi-modal
learning (Liu et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2022). Our work shares a similar
idea to curriculum learning, wherein the training data evolves
iteratively—beginning with responses that are easy to distinguish from
human-annotated data and gradually progressing to more challenging
instances. Generative Adversarial Networks. Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) represent a distinct class of
generative models, characterized by their unique adversarial process. To
enhance training stability and data quality, Mao et al. (2017)
introduced the Least Squares GAN, employing a least squares loss
function for the discriminator. A significant advancement in GANs
involves the use of Integral Probability Metrics (IPM) (Müller, 1997),
particularly highlighted in the development of Wasserstein GAN by
Arjovsky et al. (2017). This model employs IPM in its loss design,
enhancing training stability. Since then, IPMs have become crucial in
GAN design (Mroueh & Sercu, 2017; Gulrajani et al., 2017), particularly
in constraining the discriminator to a specific function class, thereby
preventing it from overpowering the generator. Furthermore,
Jolicoeur-Martineau (2018) generalized IPM-based GANs by introducing
relativistic discriminator and proposed Relativistic GAN. It is worth
noting that the objective function defined in our (4.2) is similar to
Relativistic GAN (Jolicoeur-Martineau, 2018) and reduces to an IPM
framework in Wasserstein GAN (Arjovsky et al., 2017) with a linear loss.
However, our approach differs in both the choice of the function class
and the training procedure. Inspired by GAN, Cheng et al. (2023)
proposed an adversarial learning framework named Adversarial Preference
Optimization (APO) that trains the LLM and a reward model in an
adversarial game. Similarly related to the spirit of our method,
Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning (GAIL) (Ho & Ermon, 2016) was
proposed to train separate discriminator and policy networks in each
iteration. In contrast to the above methods, SPIN relies on self-play
where both the main player and the opponent player are the same LLM from
two consecutive iterations. Alignment with AI Feedback. The objective of
alignment is to fine-tune LLMs to align with human intentions. In
addition to using human demonstrations, AI feedback is emerging as a
crucial component in the alignment process. Constitutional AI (Bai et
al., 2022b) leveraged AI feedback to align language models through a
combination of both supervised learning and reinforcement learning (RL)
phases. In the RL phase, (Bai et al., 2022b) applied Reinforcement
Learning from AI Feedback (RLAIF), training a reward model using
AI-generated preferences, followed by RL using the reward. Lee et
al. (2023) demonstrated that AI feedback can achieve comparable or
superior performance to human feedback in RL fine-tuning. They also
demonstrated that RLAIF can improve upon an SFT policy even when the LLM
labeler has the same size as the policy. Saunders et al. (2022) studied
the scaling properties of self-critique and introduced a framework for
comparing the critique ability to generation and discrimination ability.
Self-critique models employ the LLM itself to generate natural language
critiques through behavioral cloning, assisting human evaluators.

B Experiments B.1 Hyperparameters and Implementation Details

Table 1. Detailed information of HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard. For
each evaluation dataset, we present the number of few-shot examples and
metric adopted for evaluation. Datasets Arc TruthfulQA Winogrande GSM8k
HellaSwag MMLU \# few-shot 25 0 5 5 10 5 Metric acc_norm mc2 acc acc
acc_norm acc

We use the Alignment Handbook library (Tunstall et al., 2023b) as the
codebase for our self-play fine-tuning method SPIN, which includes
DeepSpeed ZeRO-3 (Rajbhandari et al., 2020) and FlashAttention-2 (Dao,
2023) to reduce training cost. We train our models with RMSProp (Hinton
et al., 2012) optimizer with no weight decay for all iterations as
commonly used in fine-tuning LLMs for alignment, with a global batch
size of 64, 10% warmup steps and bfloat16 precision. We set the peak
learning rate to be 5e-7 for iterations 0 and 1, and decay this peak
learning rate to 1e-7 for iteration 2 and 3 as we are

                                                               15

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

approaching the end of self-play fine-tuning. Lastly, we choose β = 0.1
and max sequence length to be 2048 tokens as in Tunstall et al. (2023b).
We note that at the last iteration (iter-3) where the model is close to
convergence, we increase the value of β to 5.0. We use the Accelerate
library (Gugger et al., 2022) to generate our synthetic data using
distributed inference with multiple GPUs with a global batch size of 64.
We consider the prompting template “### Instruction: {prompt}\###
Response: ” as commonly used in Taori et al. (2023). For Ultrachat200k
containing multi-round conversations, we only sample the first round as
our prompt and ground truth completion pairs.

B.2 Training Overhead

The cost overhead introduced by SPIN is mostly the generation of
synthetic data from the LLM that we train. The cost of the fine-tuning
process remains computationally equal to that of SFT and DPO. We report
both the generation and training time for SPIN in Table 2 . Results were
obtained using a machine with 8xA100 (80G) GPUs. For per 64 examples,
the generation time and training time are 6.69s and 10s respectively.

                                      Table 2. Generation and Training Times for Different Iterations
      Iteration             Iter 0                          Iter 1                        Iter 2                        Iter 3
      Process     Generation         Training   Generation           Training   Generation         Training   Generation         Training
       Time         1.45h             4.32h        1.45h              8.64h       1.45h             8.64h       1.45h             8.64h

It is evident that the generation time is dominated by the training time
at each iteration. The estimated time in Table 2 is based on the fact
that we generate 50k examples per iteration. Please note that the
doubled training time from iter 1 to iter 3 is attributed to the
utilization of a double-sized dataset (the combination of 50k synthetic
data from the previous iteration and 50k synthetic data in the current
iteration), as discussed in our Section 6.1.

B.3 Additional Experiment Result for SPIN+DPO

SPIN requires only the SFT data to improve over the traditional SFT
stage and can sit between SFT and RL finetuning. Suppose additional
preference data is provided, we can use the additional data to further
improve the performance of the model after SPIN using RL fine-tuning.
Starting at SPIN iteration 3, we further train the model with DPO for
two epochs on the 62k preference data from the UltraFeedback Binarized
dataset (Cui et al., 2023), which consists of both chosen and rejected
responses evaluated by GPT-4. Detailed performances are presented in
Table 3.

Table 3. Performance of SPIN + DPO based on zephyr-7b-sft-full across
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard datasets, compared with all baselines.
We also denote the average improvement over last iteration in the
Average column. Model Arc TruthfulQA Winogrande GSM8k HellaSwag MMLU
Average zephyr-7b-dpo-full 63.65 55.19 72.61 33.43 84.44 58.52 61.31
zephyr-7b-sft-full 60.41 43.73 74.19 26.76 82.85 60.92 58.14 SPIN
iteration 0 63.40 49.18 72.69 35.10 84.38 60.03 60.80(+2.66) SPIN
iteration 1 65.19 55.17 72.30 35.78 84.96 59.34 62.12(+1.32) SPIN
iteration 2 65.96 54.91 73.56 38.06 85.41 59.93 62.97(+0.85) SPIN
iteration 3 65.87 54.90 73.72 38.97 85.54 59.99 63.16(+0.19) SPIN
iteration 3 + DPO 66.47 60.07 78.06 37.98 86.17 59.68 64.05(+0.89)

We can observe that the checkpoint trained by SPIN can be further
improved using DPO, yielding an enhancement of 0.89% on average.
Notably, the improvement is particularly significant on the TruthfulQA
benchmark with around 5%.

B.4 Further Experiment Results

In Table 4, we show the detailed performance of SPIN at different
iterations on each of the task in Open LLM Leaderboard. In Table 5, we
also show the performance of SFT from zephyr-7b-sft-full on
Ultrachat200k for one epoch. While self-play fine-tuning with synthetic
data from zephyr-7b-sft-full effectively improves its performance,
simply fine-tuning it again on the SFT data leads to degraded
performance, as similarly observed in Figure 5. Further Investigation on
More Tasks. Here, we further investigate the performance of SPIN on a
broader variety of

                                                                        16

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Table 4. Test performance of SPIN based on zephyr-7b-sft-full across
HuggingFace Open LLM Leaderboard datasets. We also denote the average
improvement over last iteration in the Average column. Model Arc
TruthfulQA Winogrande GSM8k HellaSwag MMLU Average zephyr-7b-sft-full
60.41 43.73 74.19 26.76 82.85 60.92 58.14 SPIN iteration 0 63.40 49.18
72.69 35.10 84.38 60.03 60.80(+2.66) SPIN iteration 1 65.19 55.17 72.30
35.78 84.96 59.34 62.12(+1.32) SPIN iteration 2 65.96 54.91 73.56 38.06
85.41 59.93 62.97(+0.85) SPIN iteration 3 65.87 54.90 73.72 38.97 85.54
59.99 63.16(+0.19)

Table 5. Test performance of zephyr-7b-sft-full fine-tuned on
Ultrachat200k for 1 more epoch across HuggingFace Open LLM benchmark
datasets. SFT fails to further leverage the fine-tuning data for
performance enhancement and even results in degraded performance. Model
Arc TruthfulQA Winogrande GSM8k HellaSwag MMLU Average
zephyr-7b-sft-full 60.41 43.73 74.19 26.76 82.85 60.92 58.14 SFT epoch 1
57.76 44.39 75.77 25.85 81.69 57.89 57.23

tasks, including MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023), Big-Bench (bench
authors, 2023) and OpenBookQA (Mihaylov et al., 2018) in addition to the
Open LLM Leaderboard tasks. Specifically, we use the following tasks
from Big-Bench-Hard for a more comprehensive evaluation, including
Causal Judgment (causal reasoning), Sports Understanding (commonsense
reasoning) and Formal Fallacies (logical reasoning). In Table 6, we show
the resulting scores of SPIN on MT-Bench as well as those tasks from
Big-Bench. In Figure 6, we detail the model performances on MT-Bench
with regard to different types of questions. We can see a notably robust
improvement in the performance of SPIN on various tasks besides the
HuggingFace Benchmark, without major degradation. Notably, on MT-Bench,
the model fine-tuned by SPIN has surpassed the performance of
vicuna-13b-v1.5 (Chiang et al., 2023) with a score of 6.57.

Table 6. Test performance on other reasoning benchmark datasets for SPIN
at different iterations and zephyr-7b-sft-full. We report the average
score for MT-Bench and the accuracy score for Big Bench datasets under
standard few-shot CoT evaluation. On OpenBookQA, we report acc_norm with
1-shot example as used in Anil et al. (2023). As similar to Open LLM
Leaderboard evaluation, we observe a steady improvement in performance
on the other benchmark tasks, with no significant degradation. Model
MT-Bench BB-causal BB-formal BB-sports OpenBookQA zephyr-7b-sft-full
5.94 56.15 49.6 96.0 45.4 SPIN iteration 0 6.46(+0.52) 57.75 51.6 95.2
46.8 SPIN iteration 1 6.65(+0.19) 58.82 51.2 95.2 47.2 SPIN iteration 2
6.78(+0.13) 59.36 51.2 94.4 47.6

B.5 Generation Examples

In Tables 7 and 8, we further provide the generation examples of our
fine-tuned model by SPIN from different iterations. We can observe an
improvement in response quality as compared to the generation of the SFT
checkpoint. Meanwhile, the model generations at higher iterations
typically becomes more concise than iteration 0 and resemble the ground
truth completion better.

                                                                   17

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models Writing

                                                                                                              model
                                                                  Humanities                   Roleplay           SPIN iter-2
                                                                                                                  SPIN iter-1
                                                                                                                  SPIN iter-0
                                                                                                                  SFT

                                                                  STEM                                Reasoning
                                                                                  0123456789




                                                                   Extraction                  Math

                                                                                Coding

Figure 6. Model performance on MT-Bench. We compare SPIN across
different iterations with the base SFT model. Starting from Loading
\[MathJax\]/extensions/MathMenu.js

iteration 1, our fine-tuned model by SPIN robustly outperforms the SFT
checkpoint on all evaluation aspects.

                      Table 7. Generation example of our fine-tuned model by SPIN at different iterations.

Prompt How does the economic growth of Horsham compare to nearby towns?
Ground truth I do not have access to the latest economic data on horsham
and nearby towns. However, you can check the latest economic statistics
and reports provided by the local government or the official websites of
horsham and nearby towns for a detailed comparison of their economic
growth. zephyr-7b=sft-full According to the given material, Horsham was
growing “significantly” faster than nearby towns, indicating that it was
economically thriving.However, the given material does not specify the
exact rates or levels of economic growth of Horsham compared to nearby
towns. Without this information, it is challenging to determine whether
the differences in economic growth between Horsham and nearby towns were
significant or minimal. Iteration 0 I do not have access to the latest
economic data for horsham and nearby towns. However, horsham is known to
be a prosperous town in west sussex, uk, with a diverse economy that
includes agriculture, manufacturing, and services. The town has a strong
retail sector, and it is also home to several large companies, including
the global pharmaceutical company novartis. In terms of comparison with
nearby towns, horsham is generally considered to be one of the more
affluent towns in the region. However, the economic growth of horsham
and its neighboring towns may vary depending on various factors such as
industry, investment, and government policies. Iteration 1 I do not have
access to real-time data or information about the most recent economic
growth of horsesham and nearby towns. However, according to the recent
reports from various sources such as the office for national statistics,
horsesham’s economy primarily relies on retail, healthcare, education,
and public administration industries. Compared to nearby towns such as
lewes, chichester, and bognor regis, horsesham’s economy may have a
different composition and growth rate based on their specific industries
and economic policies. Iteration 2 I don’t have access to the most
recent economic data. However, according to a 2019 report by pwc,
horsham’s expected economic growth up to 2025 was projected to be around
2.3% per annum, which is slightly below the average for the south east
of england (2.8%). Neighbouring towns like crawley and bognor regis were
projected to experience similar growth rates. note: this may not reflect
the impact of the covid-19 pandemic that occurred in 2020.

                                                                                          18

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

                    Table 8. Another generation example of our fine-tuned model by SPIN at different iterations.

Prompt Can you clarify if Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the old site of the
Mathematical Institute are the same location? Answer according to: Go
straight to Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and sign-in.There is a big lecture
hall at the old site of the Mathematical Institute (Wegelerstr. 10,
Bonn). Ground truth No, Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the old site of the
Mathematical Institute (Wegelerstr. 10, Bonn) are not the same location.
To sign-in, one should go straight to Poppelsdorfer Allee 45. However,
there is a big lecture hall at the old site of the Mathematical
Institute. zephyr-7b=sft-full Yes, Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the old
site of the Mathematical Institute are the same location. Iteration 0
Yes, Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the old site of the Mathematical
Institute (Wegelerstr. 10, Bonn) are the same location. The Mathematical
Institute has been relocated and renamed as the Institute for
Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, but the building where it used to
be is still referred to as the old site. The big lecture hall at the old
site still exists and may be used for events or classes. Iteration 1 No,
Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the old site of the Mathematical Institute
are not the same location. While Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 is where
attendees should sign-in, the old site of the Mathematical Institute
(located at Wegelerstr. 10, Bonn) has a large lecture hall mentioned in
the statement. Therefore, it can be assumed that the two locations are
separate and not the same. Iteration 2 Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and the
old site of the Mathematical Institute (Wegelerstr. 10, Bonn) are two
different locations. As per the instruction, you need to go straight to
Poppelsdorfer Allee 45 and sign-in. However, there is a lecture hall
mentioned at the old site of the Mathematical Institute (Wegelerstr. 10,
Bonn).

C Proof of Theorems in Section 5 C.1 Proof of Theorem 5.2

Proof of Theorem 5.2. To begin with, we prove the “Sufficiency” in
Theorem 5.2. Since pdata (·\|x) = pθt (·\|x), by symmetry property of y
and y′ , we have for any θ ∈ Θ that

                                                                                                   pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                                                             
                                                                               pθ (y|x)
               2LSPIN (θ, θt ) = Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ γ log               − γ log
                                                                               pθ (y|x)            pθt (y′ |x)
                                                                           t
                                                                                                         pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                                                                    
                                                                                     pθ (y|x)
                                   + Ex∼q(·),y′ ∼pdata (·|x),y∼pθt (·|x) ℓ γ log                − γ log
                                                                                     pθt (y|x)          pθt (y′ |x)
                                                                                                   pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                                                             
                                                                               pθ (y|x)
                               = Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ γ log               − γ log
                                                                               pθt (y|x)           pθt (y′ |x)
                                              pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                                
                                                                      pθ (y|x)
                                   + ℓ γ log                − γ log
                                              pθt (y′ |x)             pθt (y|x)
                                                                                                      pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                      
                                                                           γ      pθ (y|x)     γ
                               ≥ 2Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ      log            − log
                                                                           2     pθt (y|x) 2          pθt (y′ |x)
                                            pθ (y′ |x)
                                                                               
                                     γ                      γ       pθ (y|x)
                                   + log                 − log
                                     2     pθt (y′ |x) 2            pθt (y|x)
                               = 2ℓ(0),

where the inequality is due to Jensen’s inequality (recalling that ℓ is
convex in Assumption 5.1). Therefore, we have that LSPIN (θ, θt ) ≥ ℓ(0)
= LSPIN (θt , θt ), which means that θt is the global optimum of (4.7).
As a consequence, the gradient at the point θt is zero, which concludes
θt+1 = θt .

                                                                 19

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models

Next, we prove the “Necessity”. Define g(λ) as follows: pdata (y′ \|x)  
pdata (y\|x) g(λ) = Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·\|x),y′ ∼pθt (·\|x) ℓ λ log − λ
log . pθt (y\|x) pθt (y′ \|x) Then we have g(0) = ℓ(0) and pdata (y′
\|x)    ′ ′ pdata (y\|x) g (0) = Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·\|x),y′ ∼p θt (·\|x)
ℓ (0) log − log pθ (y\|x) pθt (y′ \|x)  t pdata (y′ \|x)     ′ pdata
(y\|x) = ℓ (0) Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·\|x) log − Ex∼q(·),y ∼pθt (·\|x) log ′
pθt (y\|x) pθt (y′ \|x) h i = ℓ′ (0) KL pdata (·\|x) pθt (·\|x) + KL pθt
(·\|x) pdata (·\|x)  

                    < 0,

where the last inequality is due to the condition that ℓ′ (0) \< 0.
Therefore, there exist a λ0 such that for all 0 \< λ \< λ0 , we have
g(λ) \< ℓ(0). Choose θ ∗ such that pθ∗ (y\|x) = pdata (y\|x). For those
0 \< λ \< λ0 , we have that pθ∗ (y′ \|x)    pθ∗ (y\|x) LSPIN (θ ∗ , θt )
= Ex∼q(·),y∼pθ∗ (·\|x),y′ ∼pθt (·\|x) ℓ λ log − λ log pθt (y\|x) pθt (y′
\|x) pdata (y′ \|x)    pdata (y\|x) = Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·\|x),y′ ∼pθt
(·\|x) ℓ λ log − λ log pθt (y\|x) pθt (y′ \|x) = g(λ) \< g(0) = LSPIN
(θt , θt ),

where the second equality holds by the choice of pθ∗ (·\|x), and the
inequality holds due to the choice of λ. Therefore, we conclude that θt
is not the global optimum of (4.7) if pθt (·\|x) ̸= pdata (·\|x).

C.2 Proof Theorem 5.4

We need the following auxiliary lemma before we prove Theorem 5.4. Lemma
C.1. Suppose that ℓ(t) = log(1 + exp(−t)) and for a, b \> 0, the
following inequality holds

                                    aℓ(t) + bℓ(−t) ≥ a log(1 + b/a) + b log(1 + a/b),

the equality holds if and only if t = log(a/b).

Proof of Lemma C.1. Define g(t) = aℓ(t) + bℓ(−t) = a log(1 + exp(−t)) +
b log(1 + exp(t)), then we have a exp(−t) b exp(t) −a + b exp(t) g ′ (t)
= − + = . 1 + exp(−t) 1 + exp(t) 1 + exp(t) Therefore, g ′ (t) \< 0 when
t \< log(a/b), g ′ (t) \> 0 when t \> log(a/b), which indicates that g
achieves it minimum at t = log(a/b) which concludes the proof.

Lemma C.1 shows that the global minimum of aℓ(t) + bℓ(−t) is achieved
when t = log(a/b). Based on Lemma C.1, we can further prove that (4.2)
with the logistic loss function has a closed-form solution if we ignore
the constraint set Ft . Lemma C.2. Denote p+ (y, y′ , x) = q(x) · pdata
(y\|x) · pθt (y′ \|x) and p− (y, y′ , x) = q(x) · pθt (y′ \|x) · pdata
(y\|x),

                Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) ≥ log 2 − JSD(p+ ∥p− ),
                                                                          

where JSD(p+ ∥p− ) represents the Jensen–Shannon divergence which is
defined as follows   1  p + q 1  p + q JSD p q = KL p + KL q , 2 2 2 2
20  Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong
Language Models

where KL(·∥·) is KL-divergence. JSD is always non-negative and equals
zero if and only if p+ and p− are identical. Moreover, the global
minimum value log 2 − JSD(p+ ∥p− ) is achieved by f ∗ if and only if,  
∗ pdata (y\|x) f (x, y) = Z(x) + log , pθt (y\|x)

where Z(x) is any function that is possibly dependent on x.

Proof of Lemma C.2. We rewrite the objective function in the following
formula,

                     2Ex∼q(·),y∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ )
                                                                                 
                          Z
                      = q(x)pdata (y|x)pθt (y′ |x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) dydy′
                                                                                

                              Z
                            + q(x)pdata (y′ |x)pθt (y|x) ℓ f (x, y′ ) − f (x, y) dydy′
                                                                                     

                          Z
                      = q(x)pdata (y|x)pθt (y′ |x)ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ )
                                                                                

                            + q(x)pdata (y′ |x)pθt (y|x)ℓ f (x, y′ ) − f (x, y) dydy′
                                                                                   

                                                                    pdata (y′ |x)pθt (y|x)
                      (i)
                          Z                                                               
                                                     ′
                      ≥      q(x)pdata (y|x)pθt (y |x) log 1 +
                                                                    pdata (y|x)pθt (y′ |x)
                                                                     pdata (y|x)pθt (y′ |x)
                                                                                           
                                           ′
                            + q(x)pdata (y |x)pθt (y|x) log 1 +                              dydy′ ,
                                                                     pdata (y′ |x)pθt (y|x)

where the inequality is due to aℓ(t) + bℓ(−t) ≥ a log(1 + b/a) + b
log(1 + a/b) in Lemma C.1 with a = q(x)pdata (y\|x)pθt (y′ \|x), b =
q(x)pdata (y′ \|x)pθt (y\|x), t = f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ). The equality
(i) holds if and only if the following equation holds almost surely for
any x, y, y′ ,

                                                                pdata (y|x)pθt (y′ |x)
                                                                                      
                                                      ′
                                   f (x, y) − f (x, y ) = log                            .                            (C.1)
                                                                pdata (y′ |x)pθt (y|x)

Equation (C.1) is equivalent to

                                                                                             pdata (y′ |x)
                                                                                                          
                                                   pdata (y|x)                ′
                              f (x, y) − log                         = f (x, y ) − log
                                                    pθt (y|x)                                 pθt (y′ |x)

holds almost surely for any x, y, y′ . Therefore, the equality (i) holds
if and only if there exists some Z(x) such that   pdata (y\|x) f (x, y)
= Z(x) + log . pθt (y\|x)

Recall that p+ (y, y′ \|x) = pdata (y\|x) · pθt (y\|x) and p− (y, y′
\|x) = pθt (y\|x) · pdata (y\|x). Then, the right-hand side of (i) can
be written as pdata (y′ \|x)pθt (y\|x) Z   q(x)pdata (y\|x)pθt (y′ \|x)
log 1 + pdata (y\|x)pθt (y′ \|x) pdata (y\|x)pθt (y′ \|x)   + q(x)pdata
(y′ \|x)pθt (y\|x) log 1 + dydy′ pdata (y′ \|x)pθt (y\|x) p− (y, y′ \|x)
p+ (y, y′ \|x) Z     = p+ (y, y′ \|x) log 1 + + p− (y, y ′ \|x) log 1 +
dydy′ p+ (y, y′ \|x) p− (y, y′ \|x) 1/2\[p− (y, y′ \|x) + p+ (y, y′
\|x)\] Z   = 2 log 2 + p+ (y, y′ \|x) log p+ (y, y′ \|x) 1/2\[p− (y, y′
\|x) + p+ (y, y′ \|x)\]   + p− (y, y′ \|x) log dydy′ p− (y, y′ \|x)

                                                                     21

Self-Play Fine-Tuning Converts Weak Language Models to Strong Language
Models     p+ + p− p+ + p− = 2 log 2 − KL p+ − KL p− 2 2 = 2 log 2 − 2 ·
JSD(p+ ∥p− ),

where the last equality is by the definition of JSD. This concludes the
proof.

Lemma C.2 provides a closed-form solution to (4.2) if we ignore the
constraint set Ft . If this closed-form solution belongs to Ft , then it
should also be the solution to (4.2). This observation is the key to the
proof of Theorem 5.4.

Proof of Theorem 5.4. Under the condition of Theorem 5.4, there exists a
pθ such that 1/λ pθ (y\|x) ∝ pθt (y\|x) pdata (y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) .

                                   Z(x) such that

Therefore, there exists a function b 1/λ pθ (y\|x) = Z(x) b · pθt (y\|x)
pdata (y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) . (C.2)

Applying logarithm function on both side of (C.2) yields     pdata
(y\|x) pθ (y\|x) λ log(Z(x)) + log b = λ log ∈ Ft . pθt (y\|x) pθt
(y\|x) pdata (y\|x)  By Lemma C.2, f ∗ (x, y) = λ log(Z(x)) b + log pθt
(y\|x) is the global minimum of the following minimization problem,

                                 argmin Ey∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) .
                                                                                           
                                                                                                                             (C.3)
                                    f

                                                   pdata (y|x) 

Since f ∗ ∈ Ft , f ∗ (x, y) = λ log(Z(x)) b + log pθt (y\|x) is also the
global optimum of the optimization problem (4.2),

                                 argmin Ey∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ ) .
                                                                                           
                                  f ∈Ft

Therefore, we have proved that

                                 min Ey∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ )
                                                                                        
                                  f

                                 = min Ey∼pdata (·|x),y′ ∼pθt (·|x) ℓ f (x, y) − f (x, y′ )
                                                                                           
                                    f ∈Ft

                                  = min LSPIN (θ, θt ).                                                                      (C.4)
                                    θ∈Θ
                                                                             p                
                                                                                  θt+1 (y|x)

Since θt+1 is the global minimum of LSPIN (θ, θt ). Then by (C.4), λ log
pθt (y\|x) should be the global minimum of problem (C.3). By Lemma C.2,
there exists Z(x) such that     pθt+1 (y\|x) pdata (y\|x) λ log = Z(x) +
log , pθt (y\|x) pθt (y\|x) 1/λ which leads to the result that pθt+1
(y\|x) ∝ pθt (y\|x) pdata (y\|x)/pθt (y\|x) .

                                                              22


